well it's wonderful to be here with you
today we love joining the Sasser
Community every year for bessemer's
annual state of the cloud report and we
love going through the trends benchmarks
and metrics that underpin the cloud
economy and they're most relevant for
the cloud Founders and operators in the
room
I'm Mary dinofrio and today with my
colleague Janelle tang and Katie Ray
we're going to be going through just
that
Janelle is going to be talking about the
macros impact on public Cloud software
and where we go from here how public
Cloud companies have refocused on
profitability and efficiency
Katie is then going to talk to us about
how you can operationalize some of those
lessons for your own business some of
the tactics that you can employ and then
I'm going to go into the topic du jour
AI
but before we do that we'd love to talk
a little bit about where we've been over
the past 12 months
as we all know the past 12 months have
been relatively turbulent for cloud
Founders and many of the cloud companies
that likely many of you represent SBB
collapsed Market multiples are down and
yet we have a platform shift to AI that
is exciting everybody and the IPO window
seems to be reopening so what does this
all mean for cloud companies we're going
to start by handing it to Janelle who's
going to talk about the public markets
thank you Mary
as Mary mentioned it is no secret that
cloud stocks took a drubbing in 2022 in
a severe Market pullback event that we
coined the sassaker
and as you can see from the slide within
the year the bvp cloud index had slid
over 50 percent which was a more marked
decline compared to a broader market
indices
a main reason for the pullback was due
to the external shock of hiking interest
rates So within the year we moved out of
a hyper low interest rate environment at
record-breaking speed and this led to
multiple compression and a significant
amount of macro uncertainty
by the end of the year valuation
multiples for cloud companies had not
just Fallen below the trailing 10-year
average but it also Fallen below the
pre-pandemic long-term averages that a
lot of us in the markets were used to
seeing
and Beyond multiples many Cloud
companies also faced a deluge of
headwinds that impacted business
fundamentals such as lengthening sales
cycles and tightening customer budgets
with such a bleak macro backdrop in
place it came as no surprise that SAS
IPOs came to truly a screeching halt
which was quite a stark a contrast to
the frenzy of what we saw in 2021
on the m a front
similarly things slowed but remained
more robust for several reasons
one it was a record year for private
Equity sponsor deals specifically take
private transactions
and two on the Strategic side there were
announcements of several Blockbuster
Acquisitions most notably the biggest
announcement was from Adobe that
announced its acquisition of figma which
marked the highest valuation multiple
offered in an acquisition for any
software company of scale
and while that deal has yet to close
what it demonstrates is that
best-in-class cloud companies can derive
a valuation premium even in extremely
tough times
so suffice to say as we've gone through
2022 was certainly a gloomier for the
cloud but the skies do seem to be
partying in 2023
year-to-date the bvp cloud index is
already up over 25 percent indicating
that there may be light at the end of
this tunnel
as we talked about a lot of the
uncertainty in 2022 stemmed from
changing macro conditions most notably
interest rate hikes from the FED in an
attempt to curb inflation
in 2023 we've seen a lot more
stabilization on this front so for
instance we have slowing inflation and
the CBOE volatility index has remained
healthier this year
and while we're still quite a ways away
from the highs of the valuation
multiples that we saw in 2021
we are seeing valuation multiples
normalized closer to the range of what
we saw for long-term pre-pandemic
averages
consequently with more stabilization the
IPO window is also showing more signs of
life
just a few weeks ago marketing
automation Cloud leader clavio filed its
S1 to a lot of fanfare in the cloud
Community because this marks the first
pure Place SAS company to file to go
public after a nearly two-year drought
in SAS IPOs and at Bessemer we very much
believe that the top private Cloud
companies will shortly follow suit as
well
and on the m a front a lot of the trends
that we saw in 2022 carried on into 2023
specifically we saw again a significant
amount of take private transactions and
on the Strategic side we saw a recent
acquisition from data bricks for Mosaic
ml for a 1.3 billion dollar transaction
which indicates how AI is becoming a top
m a priority for a lot of companies
you know at Bessemer we very much
fundamentally believe that the cloud
model with its recurring Revenue nature
low marginal distribution costs and
Strong net dollar retention Dynamics is
quite possibly the best business model
to be invented and definitely one of the
most resilient business models ever to
be invented and in the face of one of
the toughest years for the cloud economy
we witnessed many companies remain
resilient by adapting quickly from the
Age of Excess as we moved into an age of
efficiency
we witness Cloud companies start to
Pivot their focus from just growth at
all costs toward driving profitability
and that's visualized very powerfully
just within the last couple months in
this graph
today the top 10 highest valued bvp
Cloud index companies are driving an
average of 14 free cash flow and this is
double what the same top 10 cohort had
achieved just a year ago
just as companies adapted the market has
also responded to the paradigm shift and
efforts to drive profitability are not
going unnoticed and in fact are being
rewarded
so let's put this into a heuristic to
contextualize how the public market
valuation sentiment has changed
at Peak bull market exuberance so this
was the end of 2021 a one percent
Improvement in Revenue growth had the
same impact on valuations as a six
percent Improvement in free cash flow
margin so said another way growth was
more important than profitability by a
factor of six at the height of bull
markets
today this ratio is closer to two to one
still in favor of growth but certainly a
bit more balance from what we saw in the
bull market years and so today a one
percent Improvement in Revenue growth
has the same impact on cloud valuations
as a two percent Improvement in free
cash flow margin
and so we've talked a bit about how the
public market responded from the change
of the Age of Excess to the age of
efficiency and I'll hand it over to Mary
to walk us through what happened on the
private side
as Janelle noted the public Cloud
markets are now rewarding efficiency and
profitability over the growth at all
cost model
so what does this mean for private Cloud
companies we can use the cloud 100 as a
proxy the cloud 100 is a list that
Bessemer puts together every year in
partnership with Forbes and Salesforce
Ventures and it represents the 100 best
private Cloud companies in the world
every year
this year for the first year the
aggregate value of the cloud 100
actually decreased year over year by 11
still to a phenomenal 650 59 billion
dollars but nonetheless it points to the
fact that the macro has imp has impacted
the best of private cloud
so what are they doing in that context
like their public peers the cloud 100
companies
are focusing on efficiency
23 percent of cloud 100 companies will
be profitable by the end of this year
2023 and two-thirds are planning to be
profitable by the end of 2024.
even for the companies that are still
burning
sixty percent of them are meaningfully
reducing their Burn only seven percent
are meaningfully increasing their burn
and just to give you some context that's
a market departure from the heights of
2020 2021 where growth at all costs was
more valued and why are they doing this
like with the public cloud cloud 100
growth rates have come down macro is
impacting the private Cloud markets
softness and purchasing power longer
sales cycles and as a consequence the
average growth rate in a cloud 100
business in 2022 was a hundred percent
and this year went down to 55 percent
if these companies did not focus on
operational efficiency in right sizing
their P L's that discrepancy in Revenue
that they might have been traject
projecting would flow through the bottom
line as increased burn and decrease
Runway
and speaking of Runway and speaking of
the market dynamics Market multiples
have gone down even for the best of
cloud
in 2021 the average Cloud 100 multiple
was 34 times decreasing to 30 times in
2022 and 26 times in 2023
this is important because even though it
hasn't gone down as much as the growth
adjusted public Cloud multiples have it
nonetheless reflects the fact that cloud
companies can't command the same migrant
multiples that they had previously and
by right siding right-sizing your p l
focusing on efficiency and focusing on
operational leverage you can raise when
you feel like your fundamentals are
strongest and when you have the most
opportunity to get a strong valuation
not from a position of weakness because
you have to raise in order to finance
your business
but how exactly do you do that how do
you drive efficiency and what are the
tactics that you all in the audience can
employ in order to drive more operating
leverage in your businesses to talk
about that I'm going to pass it to my
colleague Katie
great thank you Marion Janelle for that
uh comprehensive overview of the public
and private markets
so as Mary mentioned the question on
many Cloud Founders Minds right now is I
understand where I need to get to but
how do I actually get there it's easy to
say you need to transition to profitable
and efficient growth but the devil's in
the details and the question is how do I
actually look at my own p l and
understand where there are opportunities
to optimize it so one thing that we did
at Bessemer this past year has been
speaking at and and speaking to and
looking at both public and private Cloud
companies as well as companies in the
Bessemer portfolio and Beyond and
talking to them around what tactics they
have used to transition to more of an
efficient growth model rather than this
growth at all cost model
we broke it down by Major area the p l
so starting with
um cogs and gross margin and then going
into the major buckets of Opex sales and
marketing GNA and r d and then to people
and pricing and packaging
and we accumulated a set of tactics that
can be used by Cloud Founders to
discover potential efficiencies and to
actually drive those efficiencies within
your p l
so over the next section of this
presentation I'll go through a case
study on each of these major areas and a
way that a Bessemer portfolio company
has actually applied a tactic in each of
those areas
so starting with gross margin gross
margin is effectively the ceiling for
profitability of your business a company
public companies that have less than 60
gross margins find it structurally
basically impossible to drive more than
twenty percent free cash flow margins so
given this and given the correlation
that Janelle discussed on free cash flow
evaluation it's an incredibly important
area to look at and can have an outsized
impact on your valuation as you think
about areas of the p l to optimize
take sendgrid in our portfolio
one uh tactic that they use that has
been very kind of top of mind for
Founders recently is optimizing their
Cloud hosting costs
they realized that their cogs could
actually be minimized by doing so and so
what they did was they looked at their
entire architecture and they on they
tried to understand and audit what were
the most expensive areas of their
architecture from a compute Network and
storage perspective and then they worked
with their Engineers to understand is
there a way to re-architect those
components of our architecture in order
to in their case not only just drive
better performance but it actually drove
seven figure annual uh cost savings for
their cogs
so lucky for cloud Founders in this room
uh stengrid did this on their own but
there's actually an emerging ecosystem
of cloud hot Coast management providers
like Cloud zero or cube cost that can
actually be leveraged in order to audit
your Cloud footprint and understand
where there may be efficiencies
so moving on to the first uh major
bucket of op-backs and the largest sales
and marketing for most Cloud public
companies comes in somewhere between 30
to 40 percent of Revenue
as a result it's import really important
to look at and understand whether there
may be efficiencies to be driven
um take lost genius in our portfolio
they are a vertical SAS and payments
company for the beauty and wellness
industry and they were very lucky from
the perspective or not lucky they were
very good and they built a fantastic
product that allowed them to grow
completely organically at the start
people who own spas and salons they love
the product and they would speak to
others about the product and the company
just grew incredibly quickly organically
at the start
as the company scaled though they
realized that they needed to layer in
inorganic channels for growth but
keeping this eye towards efficiency
given their kind of history in their
early days they came up with a heuristic
that we would recommend Cloud Founders
in the room use
they came up with this idea of having a
North star Benchmark by Channel and
using it basically as like a hurdle rate
so the idea was for any channels that
hit this hurdle rate that would justify
continued investment
but for channels that didn't clear this
hurdle rate they would stop investing in
those channels and then reallocate those
sales and marketing dollars into the
over performing channels
and so for gloss genius they decided
that their Northstar Benchmark should be
a sub eight month cap payback and a 3X
LTV to CAC that was kind of what worked
for them and that was the hurdle rate
that they held their channels to when
they did a channel by Channel review
we would encourage Cloud Founders in the
room to think about what might be the
right hurdle rate to apply to your own
channels and then audit your sales and
marketing channels accordingly
moving on to GNA so GNA tends to be a
little bit overlooked when you're
thinking about efficiencies in your p l
because it's actually the smallest area
of Opex for most public Cloud companies
it comes in somewhere between 10 to 15
percent of Revenue
um and is that's one of the smallest
area of op-backs that being said though
considering that it's purely a cost
driver or a cost center rather than a
revenue driver in the way that sales and
marketing or r d is it's generally an
area that you can find some quick wind
and some potential efficiencies without
actually potentially impacting your
overall growth rate
um you know recently given the rise of
work from home looking at uh whether
there's efficiencies within your real
estate footprint that you could
rationalize is one way to think about it
or automating more back office functions
one thing that a company in our
portfolio cap mode did though was they
looked at
um their SAS sprawl footprint and
understand whether there were areas to
optimize it there so capmo is a
construction management software company
uh based out of Germany and they
realized that they didn't really have a
good sense of what software had been
procured over recent years what was the
price per seed how many seats did they
have Etc
and so they conducted an audit of that
they found potential efficiencies they
found duplicative instances
Etc and they also were able to work with
a company vertice in this case where
they could actually get some of the
benefits of group purchasing and price
transparency to negotiate about a third
off of their contract costs of a few key
large contracts
so vertice is just one example and folks
in this room are probably familiar with
these companies they actually have
booths here so you might even uh might
even be a member of some of these
companies but companies like vendor
vertice Tropic Etc they can all help you
understand
your software footprint and potentially
fight some of that SAS sprawl within
your organization
so the last bucket of Opex
um and probably the most fraught one to
actually try to optimize is research and
development so R and D is tricky because
it you can maybe find short-term gains
but in the long term though that could
actually degrade your competitive
Advantage so the question for cloud
Founders is my r d spend is a bit of a
black box how do I actually think about
optimizing it and we think that that's a
good place to start because sometimes
Cloud Founders might say I don't even
want to touch r d you know I don't want
to have any potential risk of of
degrading competitive advantage
the good news is you know there's
companies like jellyfish and all Stacks
that can be used to understand your
engineering productivity and actually do
benchmarking to get a better sense of
that department
um and there's you can also we encourage
heads of r d to Force rank your
um your current r d projects based on
highest perceived Roi to lowest
perceived Roi and then cut some percent
of the bottom performing and again
reallocate that Capital to the highest
Roi
that being said though a particularly
interesting way that we're seeing people
drive greater efficiency in r d as well
as all internal functions is through the
rise of llms
as I mentioned they can be used across
all internal functions but take
engineering for example they've been
proving to be really efficient and
helpful in actually helping generate
code and increasing the productivity of
your engineering work
at Bessemer we have a four-step
framework that we encourage our Founders
to use as they think about where our
potential opportunities to leverage and
adopt llms both externally for product
Innovation but also internally for
potential efficiencies to be had as we
think about this transition towards more
efficient growth so on that note I'll
turn it over to Mary to walk through
some examples of how Cloud 100 companies
are leveraging Ai and llms for their
external product innovation
so as you think about leveraging Ai and
optimizing your r d efficiency it's
worthwhile to know how the best
companies are doing it and what the
speed is with which they're doing it
Cloud 100 companies are doing this
exceptionally rapidly in the past eight
months Alone 55 of cloud 100 companies
have launched a generative AI product or
feature seventy percent of them use AI
or ml somehow in their products today so
it's worthwhile to take a lesson from
these Best in Class companies that
leveraging the new technologies and the
ones that can deliver the most
differentiated product experiences the
quickest is the path to success but how
do you do it there are three strategies
that cloud 100 companies have
exemplified over the past year or so on
how they've leveraged AI one is embedded
AI one's acquired Ai and one's native AI
let's start with embedded
embedded AI is simply a strategy of
using external AI tooling to augment
your product offering supercharging your
existing Cloud platform and delivering
better customer experiences
cloudinary is a company that did just
that cloudinary is a Cloud solution for
managing digital media Assets in it use
generative AI functionality to augment
its existing Suite of programmable media
apis for example generative replace used
natural language prompts to detect and
replace objects such as this black
sweatshirt to this white code
by doing so Cloud Nary opened up its Tam
by allowing its platform to be used by
non-technical users as well as its core
technical audience
the second is a story that we've already
alluded to earlier which is databricks's
acquisition of Mosaic ml
saic was a platform enabling Enterprises
to create train and deploy their own
generative AI models in through this
acquisition databricks is now able to
offer a unified platform to its
customers to deploy their own AI models
and it's number two on this year's Cloud
100 list
while that night might not be for
everyone acquiring companies is is quite
an art another approach is just being AI
native from the get-go
AI native companies think about AI as
being core to their platform
architectures from their very Inception
a great example of a company that has
done this is deep ell Investments
portfolio which offers real-time and
ai-powered language translation it uses
neural machine translation and deep
learning to understand very complex
linguistic patterns and nuances such
that it has the highest level of
accuracy continues to iterate and to
learn and can be used by in business
context given its accuracy rates
now we talked about cloudinary data
bricks and deep ell but there are many
others we could have talked to
zapier and plug-in ecosystem intercom
with Finn it's gpt4 power chat bot canva
with magic design and presentations
Cloud 100 companies are leveraging AI
across the board and we suggest that you
try to find follow suit
and think about how to embed AI from a
first principles approach think about
your application your product workflows
your cross product workflows to think
about where AI can drive the most
operational leverage through r d
efficiency
and here is the market map of tools that
you could use should you choose
from an app layer company like a bridge
and AI for clinical documentation to on
the developer developer tooling side
hugging face or the foundational model
layer open AI as many people have
already experienced the AI landscape is
really broad continuing to innovate in
The Innovation Cycles are getting
quicker and quicker
now you've learned a little bit about
how we think about driving operational
efficiency across the board and how AI
can be used in r d in particular I'm
going to pass it back to Katie to wrap
us up
right thank you so much Mary
um well
so first of all
um we really appreciate you all taking
the time to be here today
um for any further information on This
research or any of the other research
that Bessemer does you can find us
online at bvp.com or scanning this QR
code
and so just to summarize what we've
discussed today
despite a turbulent last few years in
the cloud ecosystem the cloud ecosystem
is now showing some early signs of
recovery as Janelle mentioned we have
clavio and a few others starting to test
the public market Waters and see this
sort of return to normalization
that being said given that we've
actually had this paradigm shift in the
way that investors are valuing companies
for their efficient growth rather than
growth at all costs we believe that this
actually presents a great opportunity
for cloud Founders to build really
durable businesses and leverage some of
the tactics that we discussed to go
through your p l and understand where
there may be optimizations the you know
the kind of dream is to be a rule of 40
company and we'd encourage you to look
at your p l and understand how what is a
potential path forward to potentially
get there in the long run
we believe that some of these tactics
for efficient growth as well as AI can
be leveraged in order to drive some of
this efficiency as well as Innovation
um so we really appreciate you all being
here today we know that you have
companies to build we know that you need
to go work on those businesses and so we
appreciate you being here and at
Bessemer we're excited to continue to
back the next generation of great Cloud
Founders
um we are happy to open the floor to any
questions that you may have on the case
studies we went through on efficient
growth on AI or anything else that we
covered today so thank you so much
[Applause]